	Enacted in 1882, The Chinese Exclusion Act was a pivotal piece of legislation that changed the tide for immigration in the United States. As the name suggests, it restricted immigration into the United States based on nationality and/or ethnicity. Chinese immigrants began to arrive in the United States to work in industries such as mining and railroads, but as larger numbers of immigrants arrived, there was more pushback against specifically Chinese immigrants. 	
There were minimal restrictions against immigration prior to the Chinese Exclusion Act. As the Gold Rush began to boom, more immigrants were arriving in order to make money for their families. At the time, there was no federal regulation of immigration, rather leaving it up to the states to decide who to allow. The Page Act of 1875 was a state policy that restricted specifically Chinese women from immigrating because they were suspected of prostitution. This began the precedent of restricting immigration within the United States based on profession, ethnicity, nationality, and gender. 
	The Chinese Exclusion Act was enacted in order to restrict immigration because of fear that Chinese immigrants were taking up too much of the labor force. As we hear today, Americans were afraid that immigrant laborers would take their jobs and be competition. The Chinese Exclusion Act also restricted naturalization of immigrants. They were stripped of their ability to obtain permanent residency and citizenship. The act banned immigration and naturalization for a period of 10 years, which was later extended in 1902 and 1904. 
	Even though this is a country founded on immigration and various cultures, the Chinese Exclusion Act set the precedent for becoming restrictive, that still influences policies today. Western states’ individuals were the highest portion of pushback against Chinese immigration. Because of the Gold Rush, many laborers arrived in the United States to provide for their families. Those from Western states became fearful and jealous of these immigrants for obtaining jobs, when they could not. Thus, started the pushback of immigration fueled by racial stereotypes and prejudice. Americans were concerned about preserving their united culture, and because of this, they did not want any immigrants to ruin the “purity” of their country. 	
	Additionally, the Chinese Exclusion Act was fueled by racial prejudice, with the belief that Chinese immigrants were inferior and weak. Although a country of supposed unity and inclusion, there was a massive revolt against allowing Chinese immigrants into the United States. Americans were also scared of a change of their culture and language. Rather than embracing new cultures and ethnicities and broadening their horizon, they merely pushed for no more Chinese immigration. The effort of having to learn their language, or help them learn English was too much for Americans, thus causing them to become scared of how their country would change, and thus creating the Chinese Exclusion Act. 
	By explicitly targeting Chinese immigrants, the Chinese Exclusion Act further emphasized federal agreement of discrimination. This act set the precedent that the government is easily persuaded by racial prejudice, and thus causing more discrimination within the United States. Rather than being a government to embrace inclusivity, they were desperate to maintain their purity, thus extending and emphasizing a lack of diversity within the country. 
	Title 42 directly coordinates with the ideas of the Chinese Exclusion Act. Title 42 allowed for public health officials to monitor and ban immigration based on foreign countries and their rates of diseases. Enacted during COVID-19, Title 42 was believed to benefit public health and prevent the spread of diseases. However, because COVID-19 was believed to start in China, Title 42 became a way for Chinese immigration to be restricted. Title 42 directly banned the entry of immigrants into the United States to reduce the spread of 1942.  The Chinese Exclusion Act focused on discrimination and marginalization of Chinese immigrants, as well as Title 42.
	Title 42 further excludes immigrants of not just Chinese ethnicity and nationality, but also many who were attempting to seek asylum in the United States. Much like the Chinese Exclusion Act, Americans believed they were pure without immigrants spoiling the country. With the Chinese Exclusion Act, Americans believed they could be pure without laborers, whereas Title 42 emphasized purity through the lack of the spread of diseases. However, the spread of COVID-19 didn’t lessen just because of the lack of immigration. There were still hundreds of millions of cases and deaths within the United States because of the lack of healthcare measures and preventative care. 
	Both policies reflect a restriction on immigration, although for different causes, still the same precedent of banning certain ethnic groups from the United States. Title 42 specifically impacted certain immigrant groups, such as asylum seekers, and those attempting to cross the border. The government, through the guise of public health, essentially prohibited immigration. Especially because the President at the time was Trump, he was notorious for wanting to ban immigration, especially from those coming from Southern America. Similar to the Chinese Exclusion Act, the government used this opportunity to discriminate against individuals with harsh regulations, setting the precedent that they could decide who was and was not allowed in the United States. Individuals were put through harsh conditions, just for them to not gain permission to enter the United States. There was no standard procedure for those at the border, rather being detained for their ethnicity, given no food, water, sanitary products, and placed in detention. Because of these harsh conditions, many people who tried to enter the United States, especially because of the rapid spread of COVID-19 within the detention facilities and at the border. 
Title 42 reinforced racial prejudice and targeted opinions towards immigrants coming to the United States. Especially coming from citizens, opinions of immigrants have transformed to a negative perspective. Immigrants are no longer seen as beneficial to the economy, rather erasing the purity of the United States through labor and disease. Title 42 disguises as a public health measure, when in actuality just aims to target certain groups of immigrants, who the government does not want to permit. At the time of COVID-19, many policies of border control were starting to come out, with President Trump attempting to ban as much immigration from the South as he could. Title 42 merely allowed the opportunity for the government to ban immigration without seeming like an evil power. 

Although the United States attempted to suppress immigration because of public health measures, they were unable to realize that public health safety started from the government, not from banning immigration. Although a lack of immigration would have prevented some disease, targeting specific ethnic groups and marginalized communities only emphasized the racial motives of the United States government.  
The Chinese Exclusion Act and Title 42 both had a common goal of targeting certain racial groups. The Chinese Exclusion Act was created by the same racist government that exists today. Rather than embracing the spread of culture, languages, and diversity, there is more pushback that immigrants are ruining this country. Both policies aim to target certain groups, and because of such, are creating a racial prejudice in this country. As Americans see their government embrace racist policies, this country will no longer become a safe place for individuals, rather causing more people to leave than arrive here. 
Overall, immigration is essential to the United States and policies such as the Chinese Exclusion Act and Title 42 only caused turmoil amongst immigrants and citizens. Rather than attempting to ban immigration, the government should place more of an emphasis on public health through preventative measures and a better healthcare system and creating more jobs for those within the United States. 
